		       ==== CONTENTS ====

- General Description
- Making GANDALF work
- Getting used to GANDALF with SAURON spectra
- Moving on to SDSS spectra
- Version 1.3 Add On
- Concluding Remarks
- Known Bugs

                  ==== GENERAL DESCRIPTION ====

GANDALF is a direct fitting code designed to separate the relative
contribution of the stellar continuum and of nebular emission in the
spectra of nearby galaxies, while measuring the gas emission and
kinematics.

This is normally achieved by first fitting the stellar continuum while
masking the spectral region potentially contaminated by nebular
emission and by subsequently measuring the gas emission on the
residual spectrum of such fit.

Typically, the stellar continuum is matched by a superposition of
stellar templates convolved by the stellar line-of-sight velocity
distribution (LOSVD), whereas the gas emission and kinematics is
derived assuming a Gaussian LOSVD.

As shown in Sarzi et al. (2006, MNRAS, 366, 1151), masking the regions
potentially affected by gas emission can introduce biases in the
stellar fitting process, introducing spurious features in the
residual spectra that can affect the gas measurements. This is
particularly the case for weak emission-lines and for spectra with a
limited wavelength range such as those obtained with the SAURON
integral-field spectrograph.

GANDALF overcomes these limitations, by extending the PPXF software
of Cappellari & Emsellem (2004, PASP, 116, 138) to obtain a more
refined procedure to measure the gas kinematics and fluxes without any
spectral masking.

The key ingredient in GANDALF is to treat the emission lines as
additional Gaussian templates and, while iteratively searching for
their best velocities and velocity dispersions, to solve linearly at
each step for their amplitudes and the optimal combination of the
stellar templates, which are convolved by the best stellar (LOSVD). In
this way both the stellar continuum and the emission lines are fitted
simultaneously. More details can be found in Sarzi et al. (2006), and
in what follows.

                  ==== MAKING GANDALF WORK ====

Before running GANDALF, five important steps have to be taken.

A) Make sure the following IDL library and programs are properly installed

- IDL Astronomy User's Library: -> http://idlastro.gfsc.nasa.gov/
- MPFIT: by C.B. Markwardt -> http://astrog.physics.wisc.edu/~craigm/idl/
- ROBUST_SIGMA: by H. Freudenreich -> http://idlastro.gfsc.nasa.gov/

B) A library of suitable templates has to be compiled in order to fit
the stellar continuum. These should have the same spectral resolution
and wavelength sampling.

C) Both the object and templates spectra have to be sampled on the
same natural or base-10 logarithm wavelength grid.

D) An emission-line setup file, listing the emission-lines that could
be present in observed wavelength range and the way we want to fit
them, has to be properly edited (see below).

E) The stellar kinematics has to be derived. 

Steps B) and C) are key also to the measurement of the stellar
kinematics E) using the PPXF software, which we recommend. Details on
how this can be used are found at Michele Cappellari's webpage
 
 http://www.strw.leidenuniv.nl/~mcappell/idl/

The current distribution of PPXF also includes the log_rebin.pro
program of Michele, which should be used to ln-rebin the object and
template spectra in step C). Clearly, the spectral resolution of both
object and templates has to be known for stellar kinematics to make
sense.

As regards step D), the emission-line setup file provides GANDALF with
the list of emission lines to fit, specifying whether each line is
part of a multiplet and whether its kinematics has to be derived
independently, has to be tied to that of another line, or if it has to
be held fixed at its input value. The emission-line setup file has to be
read into an IDL structure before being passed to GANDALF, which also
conveniently allows the user to change the way the lines are fitted
between different calls of GANDALF.

The emission-line setup structure can also be used to specify whether
or not a given spectral region should be masked, for instance during
the PPXF fit.

The typical emission-line setup input file should look like this

# i_line name	lambda	action	l-kind	A_i	V_g/i	sig_g/i	fit-kind
#		\AA	f/i/m	l/d#	1/rel2#	km/s	km/s	f/h/t#
  0	 Hb	4861.32	f	l	1.00	999	99	t2
  1	 [OIII]	4958.83	f	d2	0.35	999	99	f
  2	 [OIII]	5006.77	f	l	1.00	999	99	f
  3      [NI]   5197.90 m	l	1.00	1000	10	h
  4      [NI]   5200.39 m       d3	0.70	1000	10	h

where the first three fields trivially specify an index, name, and
rest-frame wavelength for each line.

The "action" field sets whether each of the listed lines should be fit
(f), ignored (i), or whether the spectral region around them should be
masked (m). 

Only when "action=f" will all other fields become relevant for
GANDALF, and the corresponding line is included in the fit.

The next field is the line-kind "l-kind" field, which allows GANDALF
to identify whether or not a given line belong to a doublet or
multiplet.

Normal lines, or the strongest of doublets (or multiplets) are
labelled with an "l" in this field, whereas the fainter members of
doublets (or multiplets) are identified by a "d#" in the "l-kind"
field, indicating with # the "i_line" index of the strongest element
of their doublet (or multiplet). In this case the input amplitude
field "A_i" is used to set the relative strength of the lines.

The next two fields, "V_g/i" and "sig_g/i", simply list the input
velocity and velocity dispersion guesses, which are held fix in case
the next field "fit-kind" = h". Typically, these fields are modified
immediately before fitting the spectra, for instance by setting V_g to
the object receiding velocity.

Finally, the "fit-kind" field sets whether the position and width of
each line has to fit freely (f), if they should be tied to that of
another line (t#, where # is the index "i_line" of the line to the
line is tied), or if they should be held (h) fixed to the input values
set by the "V_g/i" and "sig_g/i" fields.

Of course, the "fit-kind" field is only relevant for lines with an
"l-kind" = "l", i.e. it does not apply to weaker members of doublets
(or multiplets).

Thus, if the previous example of emission-line setup would be passed
on to GANDALF, only the Hb and [OIII]4959,5007 lines would be fitted,
while masking the [NI]5197,5200 region and tieing the Hb kinematics to
that of the [OIII] lines.

      ==== GETTING USED TO GANDALF WITH SAURON SPECTRA ====

In order to help the user to get used to GANDALF, the SAURON_example/
directory contains IDL codes showing how GANDALF works in the case of
the SAURON spectra. More specifically, the user should simply compile
and run the following IDL script

  gandalf_SAURON_example.pro

which will call 

  gandalf_SAURON_std.pro
  gandalf_SAURON_unc.pro

and derive the stellar and gaseous kinematics for one spectrum in the
SAURON datacube for the elliptical galaxy NGC4278 (NGC4278_bin306.fits), 
according to the standard and unconstrained procedure described in
Sarzi et al. (2006).

The previous procedures will invoke 

  ppxf.pro (to be retrieved by the user)
  gandalf.pro

as well as reading in the emission-line setup files

emission_lines_setup_std
emission_lines_setup_unc

Also the following routines
 
  bvls.pro (to be retrieved by the user)
  range.pro
  sauron_colormap.pro 

will be used. The user should retrieve the latest versions of bvls.pro
and ppxf.pro from Michele's webpage.

Both PPXF and GANDALF will use the stellar spectra from Jones (1997,
PhD thesis, Univ. North Carolina, Chapel Hill) and single-age models
from Vazdekis (1999 ApJ, 513, 224), which are listed in the template
library file PaperV_library.dat and are found in the subdirectory
PaperV_library/.

Both the object and template spectra have already been ln-rebinned,
and saved in FITS files where standard CRVALS/CDELTS CRVAL1/CDELT1
keywords provide informations on the wavelength grid on which the
object and templates have been resampled.

Although both gandalf_SAURON_std.pro and gandalf_SAURON_unc.pro are
fairly commented and produce screen outputs detailing each major step,
to further help understanding how the input emission-line structure
should be used and manipulated, below follows some details on how
gandalf_SAURON_std.pro carries out the standard SAURON emission-line
measurements presented in Sarzi et al. (2006). 

For E/S0 galaxies, the Hb, [OIII] and [NI] lines in the SAURON spectra
could rarely be measured independently without incurring in biased
results. Therefore the [OIII] lines, which are generally stronger,
were measured first, and then the Hb and [NI] fluxes were derived
while imposing on these lines the kinematics of the [OIII] lines.

Here is how this is achieved in gandalf_SAURON_std.pro:

Step 0 -- emission-line structure prior to using PPXF to derive the
       stellar kinematics, while masking all spectral regions
       potentially affected by nebular emission.
# i_line name	lambda	action	l-kind	A_i	V_g/i	sig_g/i	fit-kind
#		\AA	f/i/m	l/d#	1/rel2#	km/s	km/s	f/h/t
  0	 Hb	4861.32	m	l	1.00	999	99	h
  1	 [OIII]	4958.83	m	d2	0.35	999	99	f
  2	 [OIII]	5006.77	m	l	1.00	999	99	f
  3      [NI]   5197.90 m	l	1.00	999	99	h
  4      [NI]   5200.39 m       d3	0.70	999	99	h

This is the initial emission-line setup structure provided by the
emission_lines_setup_std file, and is used by the function
mask_emission_lines_SAURON in gandalf_SAURON_std.pro to mask the Hb,
[OIII] and [NI] regions.

Step 1 -- emission-line structure prior to the 1st call of GANDALF.
       Fit the [OIII] lines while Hb and [NI] are still masked.
# i_line name	lambda	action	l-kind	A_i	V_g/i	sig_g/i	fit-kind
#		\AA	f/i/m	l/d#	1/rel2#	km/s	km/s	f/h/t
  0	 Hb	4861.32	m	l	1.00	999	99	h
  1	 [OIII]	4958.83	f	d2	0.35	999	99	f
  2	 [OIII]	5006.77	f	l	1.00	999	99	f
  3      [NI]   5197.90 m	l	1.00	999	99	h
  4      [NI]   5200.39 m       d3	0.70	999	99	h


Here the action fields for the [OIII] lines have been modified to "f",
and after using again mask_emission_lines_SAURON function, this
emission-line setup structure is ready to be passed to GANDALF

Step 2 -- emission-line structure prior to the 2nd call of GANDALF. 
	  Derive the amplitude of all lines, fixing their kinematics
          to that of the [OIII] lines
# i_line name	lambda	action	l-kind	A_i	V_g/i	sig_g/i	fit-kind
#		\AA	f/i/m	l/d#	1/rel2#	km/s	km/s	f/h/t
  0	 Hb	4861.32	f	l	1.00	1020.1	81.6	h
  1	 [OIII]	4958.83	f	d2	0.35	1020.1	81.6	h
  2	 [OIII]	5006.77	f	l	1.00	1020.1	81.6	h
  3      [NI]   5197.90 m	d4	0.35	1020.1	81.6	h
  4      [NI]   5200.39 m       l	1.00	1020.1	81.6	h

Here the remaining masks are lifted by also setting the Hb and [NI]
action fields to "f" and calling again mask_emission_lines_SAURON.
The kinematics of all the lines will be then held fix to that of the
[OIII] lines in the next, and last, GANDALF call, by further setting
all V_g/i and sig_g/i field to the velocity and velocity dispersion of
the [OIII] lines derived after step 1 (say 1020.1 and 81.g km/s), and
by setting all fit-kind fields to "h"

Concluding this section are some comments on the outputs of
gandalf_SAURON_std.pro and gandalf_SAURON_unc.pro, the FITS files
out_std.fits and out_unc.fits. These contain, stacked in 7 levels

1) the input spectrum
2) the best fitting model, including both stellar and emission-line components
3) the best fitting emission-line spectrum
4) the input spectrum cleaned by any detected nebular emission,
   generally used to derive the strength of stellar absorption-line
   features. This is constructed by means of the function
   remouve_detected_emission_SAURON, which is quite SAURON specific.
5) the best fitting parameters for the stellar kinematics (V, sigma,
   h3, h4, h5, h6) and gaseous kinematics (Flux, Amplitude, V, sigma,
   and amplitude over residual-noise ratio A/N, for Hb, [OIII] and [NI])
6) the normalised weights assigned to each stellar template
7) the corresponding optimal combination of templates

These outputs can be read using the MRDFITS routine, like 
std_model = mrdfits('out_std.fits',1)

                  ==== MOVING ON TO SDSS SPECTRA ====

Although initially designed to deal with SAURON data, GANDALF is by
no mean restricted to a specific wavelength range. For instance, using
GANDALF with SLOAN spectra would only need some editing of the
previous SAURON-specific IDL wrappers, adopting a different template
library such as Bruzual & Charlot, ln-rebinning the data and
templates, and using an emission-line setup file like the following

# i_line name	lambda	action	l-kind	A_i	V_g/i	sig_g/i	fit-kind
#		\AA	f/i/m	l/d#	1/rel2#	km/s	km/s	f/h/t
  0	 [OII]	3726.03	m	l 	1.000	1000	10	t18
  1	 [OII]	3728.73	m	l 	1.000	1000	10	t18
  2	[NeIII]	3868.69	m	l 	1.000	1000	10	t18
  3	[NeIII]	3967.40	m	l 	1.000	1000	10	t18
  4      He     3970.07 m       l       1.000   1000    10      t17
  5      Hd     4104.73 m       l       1.000   1000    10      t17
  6      Hg     4340.46 m       l       1.000   1000    10      t17
  7      [OIII] 4363.15 m       l       1.000   1000    10      t18
  8	 HeII	4685.74	m	l	1.000	1000	10	t17
  9	 Hb	4861.32	m	l	1.000	1000	10	t17
 10	 [OIII]	4958.83	m	d11	0.350	1000	10	t18
 11	 [OIII]	5006.77	m	l	1.000	1000	10	t18
 12      [NI]   5197.90 m	l	1.000	1000	10	t18
 13      [NI]   5200.39 m       d12	0.700	1000	10	t18
 14      [OI]	6300.20 m	l	1.000	1000	10	t18
 15      [OI]	6363.67 m	d14	0.333	1000	10	t18
 16	 [NII]	6547.96	m	d18	0.340	1000	10	t18
 17	 Ha 	6562.80	m	l 	1.000	1000	10	f
 18	 [NII]	6583.34	m	l	1.000	1000	10	f
 19	 [SII]	6716.31 m	l	1.000	1000	10	t18
 20 	 [SII]	6730.68 m	l	1.000	1000	10	t18

whereby all recombination and forbidden lines are assumed to share
different kinematics (e.g. Tremonti et al 2004, ApJ, 613, 798). 

In fact, in the directory SDSS_example/ we provide an IDL script that
read in and fit a SLOAN spectrum, which is called

  gandalf_SDSS_example.pro

and which will invoke 

  gandalf_SDSS.pro

In this example, reddening by dust is used instead of multiplicative
polinomials to adjust the stellar continuum and the emission-line
fluxes, a feature that has been recently introduced in GANDALF
(keyword REDDENING) and that should be used only when one is confident
of the flux calibration of his/her spectra. The long wavelength range
of the SLOAN allows GANDALF to constrain the amount of reddening using
the observed decrement of the Balmer lines, which can be set to have
an intrinsic decrement consistent with recombination theory by simply
treating the lines as a multiplet. The corresponding emission-line
setup therefore looks like this

# i_line name	lambda	action	l-kind	A_i	V_g/i	sig_g/i	fit-kind
#		\AA	f/i/m	l/d#	1/rel2#	km/s	km/s	f/h/t
  0	 [OII]	3726.03	m	l 	1.000	1000	10	t18
  1	 [OII]	3728.73	m	l 	1.000	1000	10	t18
  2	[NeIII]	3868.69	m	l 	1.000	1000	10	t18
  3	[NeIII]	3967.40	m	l 	1.000	1000	10	t18
  4      He     3970.07 m       d15     0.066   1000    10      t17
  5      Hd     4101.73 m       d15     0.091   1000    10      t17
  6      Hg     4340.46 m       d15     0.164   1000    10      t17
  7      [OIII] 4363.15 m       l       1.000   1000    10      t18
  8	 HeII	4685.74	m	l	1.000	1000	10	t18
  9	 Hb	4861.32	m	d15	0.348	1000	10	t17
 10	 [OIII]	4958.83	m	d10	0.350	1000	10	t18
 11	 [OIII]	5006.77	m	l	1.000	1000	10	t18
 12      [NI]   5197.90 m	l	1.000	1000	10	t18
 13      [NI]   5200.39 m       l	1.000	1000	10	t18
 14      [OI]	6300.20 m	l	1.000	1000	10	t18
 15      [OI]	6363.67 m	d14	0.333	1000	10	t18
 16	 [NII]	6547.96	m	d16	0.340	1000	10	t18
 17	 Ha 	6562.80	m	l 	1.000	1000	10	f
 18	 [NII]	6583.34	m	l	1.000	1000	10	f
 19	 [SII]	6716.31 m	l	1.000	1000	10	t18
 20 	 [SII]	6730.68 m	l	1.000	1000	10	t18

The main workhorse that allows to use reddening in GANDALF is the
function dust_calzetti, which adopts the dust model of Calzetti et
al. (2000, ApJ, 533, 682) to return flux attenuation values at the
desired wavelength for any given E(B-V) value. This same routine is
also used in gandalf_SDSS.pro to account for foreground galactic
extinction and de-reddened the SLOAN spectra prior to any kinematic
and emission-line analysis.

The new keyword REDDENING in GANDALF allows the user to adopt either a
single dust component, affecting both the stellar continuum and the
emission-line fluxes, or to include also a second dust component that
affects only the emission-line templates. This is the option adopted
in the present example.

When reddening is used instead of multiplicative polynomials to adjust
the overall shape of the spectra, GANDALF will return emission-line
flux values already corrected for extinction, whereas the line
amplitude will still be output as observed. Furthermore, since the
Balmer lines have been treated as a multiplet only the Ha parameters
will be returned, although the de-reddened flux values of the
high-order Balmer lines can be obtained by simply rescaling the Ha
fluxes using the theoretical decrement imposed through the input
emission-line setup.

The gandalf_SDSS.pro script also manages to exclude from the analysis
those spectral regions where atmospheric emission lines may have not
been perfectly removed, by identifying them as "sky" lines in the
emission-line setup

100      sky    5577.00 m       l       1.000   1000    10      f
101      sky    6300.00 m       l       1.000   1000    10      f
102      sky    6363.00 m       l       1.000   1000    10      f

and using a more general version of the masking function, called
simply mask_emission_lines.

As in the previous, SAURON-specific example, both object and templates
have already been log-rebinned, in this case in base 10 and straight
from the SDSS database and the Bruzual & Charlot (2003) models release.
The use of base-10 log-rebinned spectra is indicated to GANDALF by the
LOG10 keyword.

In the SDSS_example directory we provide two additional simple IDL
programs.  The first, called show_GANDALF_fit.pro, allows to produce
postscript figures illustrating the result of the GANDALF fit, whereas
the second, get_all_lines_amplitudes_fluxes_and_ews.pro, re-extract
the values for the amplitude and flux of all the lines that were
fitted, not only for the principal elements of doublets or
multiplets. Values are both as observed and de-reddened by dust
extinction, and we also extract the equivalent width of the
lines. Eventually, this should become part of the gandalf_SDSS
wrapper.

                  ==== VERSION 1.3 ADD ON ====

The latest release of GANDALF sees the introduction of a new keyword,
FOR_ERRORS, which tells the program to evaluate properly the
uncertainties for all of the emission-line parameters. To this goal,
GANDALF will perform a second fit to the spectra starting from the
best-fitting solution, where in addition to the position and width of
the lines now also the amplitude of the lines will be solved
non-linearly using MPFIT. This latest possibility added a considerable
layer of complication to the program itself, which is why the GANDALF
script has now been considerably restructured and commented.

An important aspect to keep in mind when considering the errors on the
line amplitudes and fluxes that are output by GANDALF, is that these
can become quite large (up to 30-40%) in the absence of clearly
detected Balmer lines and when adopting in the fits a second dust
component, which is specific only to the emission-line region. In
fact, only the Balmer lines (in particular both Ha and Hb), by means
of a prior on their intrinsic temperature-dependend line decrement,
can actually constrain such a reddening component.

A second, small new feature of this latest release of GANDALF, is that
it is now possible to include negative Gaussian components in the fit,
in order to account for instance for the presence of interstellar
absorption features such as those from the sodium Na D absorption
line. For this, one only needs to specify a negative amplitude guess
in the emission-line setup.

For the sake of clarity, in this release we switched on the new
keyword FOR_ERRORS only when calling GANDALF in the SDSS-specific
example. Note that the SDSS wrapper now also outputs an array
specifying which parts of the spectrum where in fact used during the
fit, which can then be shown by the new version of the ancillary
plotting routine, SHOW_GANDALF_FIT.pro.

This was used to produce the following figures

     spSpec-51908-0277-120_fits.ps
     spSpec-51671-0299-123_fits.ps
     spSpec-51985-0295-530_fits.ps
     spSpec-53149-1421-349_fits.ps

which shows SDSS spectra with decreasing strength of the Balmer lines
which were fitted with both "screen" and "internal" reddening
components. For these objects the corresponding errors in the observed
amplitude of the Ha line turned out to be 2, 8, 10 and 26%,
respectively.

                  ==== CONCLUDING REMARKS ====

To conclude we note that GANDALF can also be used to match line
profiles that are more complicated than simple Gaussians. By adding to
the emission-line setup secondary Gaussian components it is possible
to match reasonably well lines with red- or blue-shifted tails, lines
with Voigt profiles, and to include also broad components. Key to this
exercise is to prompt GANDALF with suitable guesses for the job it is
required to do. To facilitate this task the position and the width of
the several lines can now be separately tied through the use of the
new "v#" and "s#" fit-kind fields. For instance, in fitting only the
Hb and [OIII] lines

# i_line name	lambda	action	l-kind	A_i	V_g/i	sig_g/i	fit-kind
#		\AA	f/i/m	l/d#	1/rel2#	km/s	km/s	f/h/t
  0	 Hb	4861.32	f	l	1.00	1000	100	f
  1	 [OIII]	4958.83	f	d2	0.35	1000	100	f
  2	 [OIII]	5006.77	f	l	1.00	1000	100	f

to add an Broad Hb component we would simply add to the emission-line
setup file the following line

# to add an Broad Hb component
  10	 HbBr 	4861.32	f	l 	1.000	1000	900	f

which prompt GANDALF to start fitting the Hb line profile using also a
second and much broader Gaussian. On the other hand, to mimic a Voigt
profile for the [OIII] lines we would add a second Gaussian component
that is also initially broader but that is held at the same position
of the principal component, appending the following two lines

# to mimic a Voigt profile 
  21	[OIII]2 4958.83	i	d22	0.35	1000	400	v2
  22	[OIII]2 5006.77	i	l	1.00	1000	400	v2

Finally, to obtain a profile with a blue wing we would simply add to
the emission-line setup a second Gaussian starting at a smaller
receding velocity, as follow

# to mimic a blue-shifted profile 
  31	[OIII]b 4958.83	i	d32	0.35	700	100	f
  32	[OIII]b 5006.77	i	l	1.00	700	100	f

More examples on how to match complex line-profile with GANDALF will
be added in future releases. 

Last but not least, please notice that:

- GANDALF is the intellectual property of M. Sarzi, J. Falcon-Barroso &
R.F. Peletier (e-mail: m.sarzi@herts.ac.uk, jfalcon@rssd.esa.int,
peletier@astro.rug.nl).

- GANDALF is provided as is without any warranty whatsoever. Permission
to use, for non-commercial purposes is granted.  Permission to modify
for personal or internal use is granted, provided the copyright notice
and disclaimer are included unchanged at the beginning of the
file. All other rights are reserved. 

- If you find GANDALF useful, please acknowledge the SAURON team as
follows "GANDALF was developed by the SAURON team and is available
from the SAURON website (www.strw.leidenuniv.nl/sauron). See also
Sarzi et al. (2006, MNRAS, 366, 1151) for details."

                      ==== KNOWN BUGS ====

Apparently both pPXF and GANDALF can fail to work when using the
latest version of MPFIT, whereas everything seems to works fine with
earlier releases (I use a 2005 version). Any feedback is welcome.