J. Moustakas, 2008 July 07, NYU
jm09jan - pipeline updated and modularized significantly  

MIKE redux page: http://web.mit.edu/~burles/www/MIKE
MIKE cookbook: http://web.mit.edu/~burles/www/MIKE/mike_cookbook.html

Add the following environment variable: DEEP2_ALPHA_DIR, and then make
the following subdirectories for each night:

ut080414
   Raw/     - 
   rawdata/ - 
   preproc/ - 
   spec1d/  - 

The 'Raw' subdirectory is required by the MIKE pipeline.  The
preprocessed files (see below) are stored in 'preproc' and the actual
raw data are kept in 'rawdata'.  The soft links to the Raw directory
are made below.

Now go and reduce the data; the driver routine is ALPHA_REDUCE_ALL:

* Fix some header mistakes that affect the processing:
   IDL> alpha_reduce_all, /fixheaders

* Do the preprocessing - reject cosmic rays and get rid of some
electronic banding.
   IDL> alpha_reduce_all, /preproc

* Make the soft links.  Basically, generate the appropriate set of
soft links in 'Raw' pointing to the data in 'preproc' or in 'rawdata'
(for all other files).
   IDL> alpha_reduce_all, /makelinks

* Initialize the MIKE subdirectories and files:
   IDL> alpha_reduce_all, /init

* Reduce the calibration data: First, process and fit the milky and
trace flats: [1] generate a stacked, normalized milky flat
(mike_mkmflat); [2] combine the trace flats for order and slit tracing
(mike_mktflat); and [3] generate a smooth model of the order curvature
using the trace flat previously created (mike_edgeflat).  Second,
process the arcs and derive the 2D wavelength map: [1] process the raw
arc frames (mike_procarc); [2] determine the offset between the trace
flat and the position of the arcs due to thermal expansion
(mike_arcalign); [3] derive a 1D solution down the center of each
order (mike_fitarc); [4] create a 2D solution (mike_fit2darc); [5]
trace the individual arc lines (mike_tracearc); [6] fit the changing
slope of the arc lines (mike_fittrcarc); [7] create a 2D wavelength
image (mike_mkaimg).  Finally, derive the slit profile
(mike_slitflat).
   IDL> alpha_reduce_all, /stage1

* Reduce the science spectra (bias-subtract, flat-field, etc.,
identify the orders of interest, derive the trace, sky-subtract, and
extract 1D spectra): 
   IDL> alpha_reduce_all, /stage2

* Reduce the standard star(s) and build the sensitivity function:
   IDL> alpha_reduce_all, /
     
* Flux-calibrate and write out both fluxed and unfluxed coadded 1D
spectra: 
   IDL> alpha_reduce_all, /stage3
