We measure the emission-line fluxes of the objects in our sample using
the method described by \citet{moustakas10a}.  Briefly, we fit a
non-negative linear combination of \citet{bruzual03a} population
synthesis models with instantaneous burst ages ranging from $5$~Myr to
$10.5$~Gyr (the age of the Universe at $z\sim0.25$), assuming the
\citet{chabrier03a} initial mass function from
$0.1-100~\mathcal{M}_{\odot}$.  Motivated by the fact that the
gas-phase metallicities of these objects are sub-solar (see \S???), we
assume a fixed stellar metallicity of $Z=0.004$ ($20\%Z_{\odot}$);
however, we have verified that using solar-metallicity templates has a
negligible effect on the derived line-strengths ({\bf true?}).  After
subtracting the best-fitting stellar continuum from the data, we are
left with a pure emission-line spectrum self-consistently corrected
for underlying stellar absorption.  Finally, we fit all the emission
lines simultaneously using Gaussian line-profiles.  In Figure~??? we
illustrate our fitting method for one object in our sample, EGS19.  In
the top panel we plot the observed spectrum (light grey), the
best-fitting continuum model (black), and the residual emission-line
spectrum (dark grey).  We show the full best-fitting emission-line
model spectrum (dark red) in the top panel, and in the lower panel we
zoom into the emission lines of interest.  The lower, middle panel in
particular emphasizes the importance of correcting the H$\beta$
line-strength for underlying stellar absorption using this kind of
technique (see, e.g., walcher10a, for a recent review).
